When we talk about education we mean not only the transfer of knowledge, but also how well this is
accomplished using various techniques (Winters 2011). Varieties of techniques from different fields of art
(e.g. drawing, music, theatre) can improve learning (Eisner 1998). The educational implications of art have
been investigated by a number of researchers (Burkitt et al. 2005; Cox 2005; Anning 1999; Warren 2003; Eisner 1998). Doodling, unconscious scribbling, one of the most common habits among students, is one of the
practical methods in the field of art. Recently, there have been a few studies suggesting that doodling can
improve academic retention (Andrade 2010; Brown 2011; Chan 2012).
Doodling usually happens through unconscious drawing of patterns and shapes when people are bored
with something. It may be observed as a common practice by students on their books or in marginal notes.
Some teachers consider it a matter of losing attention and concentration. The term ‘doodle’ was first used in
1930 with the meaning which we know today: that is, absentmindedly drawing nonsense symbols, designs,
figures and patterns, but in a more comprehensive definition it can be said that doodling is an unconscious
designing while no attention is paid by the person (Gonzalez 2010).
Doodling usually occurs whilst a person is day-dreaming or is experiencing mental wandering. It hardly
ever happens when one is fully concentrating (Singer 1966). Both these two situations are states in which
the default mood of the mind is active (Schott 2011). Researchers observed that effective learning requires
the involvement of both brain hemispheres (Kerry 2005). Studies show that there is a strong positive correlation between the dominance of the right side of the brain and educational failure or behavioural disorders
in schools (Warren 2003; Stellern et al.1986). To involve both brain hemispheres, the brain should be trained.
That training includes a number of activities to strengthen mental skills like concentration, attention and problem solving. In this regard, the variety of activities might be accentuated. It is noted that drawing and
music are the most important comprehensive activities that involve both hemispheres (Caine & Caine 1990).
So we may observe doodling as an innovative activity that could affect both the right and the left brain
hemispheres.
Doodling decreases the level of autonomous arousal, accompanied by day-dreaming and tiredness, and
keeps the person conscious by increasing concentration (London et al. 1972). A simple activity like doodling
needs a low level of resources in the brain and is also helpful to prevent day-dreaming without affecting
concentration (Andrade 2010; Chan 2012). Day-dreaming is associated with the generally high arousal level
seen in boring situations through increased activity in default cortical networks (Mason et al. 2007; Smallwood et al. 2007b). Doodling focuses the brain and stops it from the day-dreaming which leads to a
decrease in concentration (Andrade 2010).
There have been a number of studies on the role of doodling in preventing day-dreaming and mental
wandering (Andrade 2010; Aellig et al. 2009; Chan 2012). In one study, doodling is requested while an auditory task is given. The results show that doodlers are unexpectedly more successful in remembering than
the non-doodlers (Andrade 2010). In another study, doodling is asked while a video task is given. It is
demonstrated that there is not a significant correlation between doodling measures and the number of correct video content items (Aellig et al. 2009). Recently, Chan (2012) has shown that doodling negatively
affects performance on a visual recall task. This may show that doodling can only be helpful if it shares no
common cognitive resource with the main activity. Doodling generally increases concentration: that is, an
ability to keep and remember information, especially in the case of boring and complicated subjects
(Andrade 2010). It activates the mental eye using a part of the visual cortex, resulting in the ability to make
mental images, to solve problems in an innovative way, and to activate the unconscious part of the mind
through keeping the conscious part activated. It integrates the visual, audience and kinetic senses, all of
which lead to a better learning process (Brown 2011).
So previous studies show that, except for situations in which the resources needed for the main activity
and those for doodling are the same, doodling is indeed helpful (Andrade 2010; Chan 2012). This may be
because mental wandering requires more resources than doodling (Aellig et al. 2009; Smallwood et al.
2007a)
In fact, day-dreaming and mental wandering are considered to be barriers in the way of educational
development, especially for adolescents (Smallwood et al. 2007a). Basically, one of the important factors in
educational performance is the functionality of working memory (Gathercole & Alloway 2008; Gathercole
et al. 2008; Gathercole et al. 2006). Since working memory depends on concentration (Gathercole & Alloway
2004), it can be said that improving concentration indeed affects the learning process positively (Holmes
et al. 2010).
Since the teenage and adolescent years are the period in which growth in mental experience and learning
flexibility takes place (Jacob 2002; Charles & Luoh 2003; Dubas et al. 1991; Graber et al. 1997; Stattin & David
1990), students in this age group are experiencing physical and mental changes. They are subject to daydreaming and mental wandering more than the others. This may lead to educational failure. Therefore, it is
important to study ways to decrease day-dreaming and mental wandering, to help students to focus and
achieve a better educational performance (Smallwood et al. 2007a). Therefore, on the basis of the frequency
of doodling amongst students (Chan 2012), here we are to study the effects of doodling on learning/education performance.
Furthermore, one of the successful methods which has gained a lot of attention in the past few years is
the VAK learning method (University of Pennsylvania 2009). This method is based on the idea that the subject connects with the data being gathered through one or more ways: visual, audience and kinetic. Since
people normally lack enough knowledge about their abilities to know the best way of learning, invention
and use of a method which covers the three ways while respecting the teaching process seems beneficial (University of Pennsylvania 2009). In this regard, it may be said that doodling as a visual and kinetic task,
concurrently with an audio task (as used in this study), can improve learning and be a useful auxiliary device
for teaching.